---
layout: getting_started
title: 3 Creating custom Mix tasks
guide: 3
total_guides: 3
---

# {{ page.title }}

In Mix, a task is simply an Elixir module inside the `Mix.Tasks` namespace containing a `run/1` function. For example, the `compile` task is a module named `Mix.Tasks.Compile`.

Let's create a simple task:

{% highlight elixir %}
defmodule Mix.Tasks.Hello do
  use Mix.Task

  @shortdoc "This is short documentation, see"

  @moduledoc """
  A test task.
  """
  def run(_) do
    IO.puts "Hello, World!"
  end
end
{% endhighlight %}

Save this module to a file named `hello.ex` then compile and run it as follows:

    $ elixirc hello.ex
    $ mix hello
    Hello, World!

The module above defines a task named `hello`. The function `run/1` takes a single argument that will be a list of binary strings which are the arguments that were passed to the task on the command line.

When you invoke `mix hello`, this task will run and print `Hello, World!`. Mix uses its first argument (`hello` in this case) to lookup the task module and execute its `run` function.

You're probably wondering why we have a `@moduledoc` and `@shortdoc`. Both are used by the `help` task for listing tasks and providing documentation. The former is used when `mix help TASK` is invoked, the latter in the general listing with `mix help`.

Besides those two, there is also `@hidden` attribute that, when set to true, marks the task as hidden so it does not show up on `mix help`. Any task without `@shortdoc` also won't show up.

### 3.1 Common API

When writing tasks, there are some common mix functionality we would like to access. There is a gist:

* `Mix.project` - Returns the project configuration under the function `project`; Notice this function returns an empty configuration if no `mix.exs` file exists in the current directory, allowing many Mix functions to work even if a `mix.exs` project is not defined;

* `Mix.Project.current` - Access the module for the current project, useful in case you want to access special functions in the project. It raises an exception if no project is defined;

* `Mix.shell` - The shell is a simple abstraction for doing IO in Mix. Such abstractions make it easy to test existing mix tasks. In the future, the shell will provide conveniences for colored output and getting user input;

* `Mix.Task.run(task, args)` - This is how you invoke a task from another task in Mix; Notice that if the task was already invoked, it works as no-op;

There is more to the Mix API, so feel free to [check the documentation](/docs/stable/Mix.html), with special attention to [`Mix.Task`](/docs/stable/Mix.Task.html) and [`Mix.Project`](/docs/stable/Mix.Project.html).

### 3.2 Namespaced Tasks

While tasks are simple, they can be used to accomplish complex things. Since they are just Elixir code, anything you can do in normal Elixir you can do in Mix tasks. You can distribute tasks however you want just like normal libraries and thus they can be reused in many projects.

So, what do you do when you have a whole bunch of related tasks? If you name them all like `foo`, `bar`, `baz`, etc, eventually you'll end up with conflicts with other people's tasks. To prevent this, Mix allows you to namespace tasks.

Let's assume you have a bunch of tasks for working with Riak.

{% highlight elixir %}
defmodule Mix.Tasks.Riak do
  defmodule Dostuff do
    ...
  end

  defmodule Dootherstuff do
    ...
  end
end
{% endhighlight %}

Now you'll have two different tasks under the modules `Mix.Tasks.Riak.Dostuff` and `Mix.Tasks.Riak.Dootherstuff` respectively. You can invoke these tasks like so: `mix riak.dostuff` and `mix riak.dootherstuff`. Pretty cool, huh?

You should use this feature when you have a bunch of related tasks that would be unwieldy if named completely independently of each other. If you have a few unrelated tasks, go ahead and name them however you like.

## 3.3 OptionParser

Although not a Mix feature, Elixir ships with an `OptionParser` which is quite useful when creating mix tasks that accepts options. The `OptionParser` receives a list of arguments and returns a tuple with parsed options and the remaining arguments:

    OptionParser.parse(["--debug"])
    #=> { [debug: true], [] }

    OptionParser.parse(["--source", "lib"])
    #=> { [source: "lib"], [] }

    OptionParser.parse(["--source", "lib", "test/enum_test.exs", "--verbose"])
    #=> { [source: "lib", verbose: true], ["test/enum_test.exs"] }

Check [`OptionParser`](/docs/stable/OptionParser.html) documentation for more information.

## 3.4 Sharing tasks

After you create your own tasks, you may want to share them with other developers or re-use them inside existing projects. In this section, we will see different ways to share tasks in Mix.

### 3.4.1 As a dependency

Imagine you've created a Mix project called `my_tasks` which provides many tasks. By adding the `my_tasks` project as a dependency to any other project, all the tasks in `my_tasks` will be available in the parent project. It just works!

### 3.4.2 As a BEAM file

Mix tasks are useful not only inside projects, but also to create new projects, automate complex tasks and to avoid repetitive work. For such cases, you want a task always available in your workflow, regardless if you are inside a project or not.

For such cases, Mix allows developers to install and uninstall BEAM files locally. Local tasks can be installed from a path or any URL and are available from anywhere with Mix:

    $ mix local.install http://elixir-lang.org/hello.beam

The URL above contains the same `hello.ex` we have built at the beginning of this chapter. If everything works as expected, the task will be installed on your machine and you can then successfully invoke it:

    $ mix hello

You can use `mix local` to show all available local tasks and their path. Removing a task is as easy as:

    $ mix local.uninstall hello

### 3.4.3 As an archive

The BEAM file approach only works if you are sharing small tasks, one-off scripts. More complex tasks require distributing a set of files and sometimes even static contents. For such cases, Mix can generate archives from existing mix projects. Inside your project, just run:

    $ mix do archive, local.install

The command above will create an archive and install it locally. All the tasks in the archive is now accessible from anywhere with Mix, which can also be managed and viewed via `mix local`. Notice that archives do not include the source files nor the project dependencies.

### 3.4.4 MIX_PATH

The last mechanism for sharing tasks is `MIX_PATH`. By setting up your `MIX_PATH`, any task available in the `MIX_PATH` will be automatically visible to Mix. Here is an example:

    $ export MIX_PATH="/full/path/to/my/project/ebin"

This is useful for complex projects that must be installed at `/usr` or `/opt` but still hook into Mix facilities.

With all those options in mind, you are ready to go out, create and install your own tasks! Enjoy!