---
layout: getting_started
title: 10 Enumerables and Streams
guide: 10
---

# {{ page.title }}

  <div class="toc"></div>
  <p></p>

## 10.1 Enumerables

Elixir provides the concept of enumerables and [the `Enum` module](/docs/stable/elixir/Enum.html) to work with them. We have already learned two enumerables: lists and maps.

```iex
iex> Enum.map([1, 2, 3], fn x -> x * 2 end)
[2, 4, 6]
iex> Enum.map(%{1 => 2, 3 => 4}, fn {k, v} -> k * v end)
[2, 12]
```

The `Enum` module provides a huge range of functions to transform, sort, group, filter and retrieve items from enumerables. It is one of the modules developers use frequently in their Elixir code.

Elixir also provides ranges:

```iex
iex> Enum.map(1..3, fn x -> x * 2 end)
[2, 4, 6]
iex> Enum.reduce(1..3, 0, &+/2)
6
```

Since the Enum module was designed to work across different data types, its API is limited to functions that are useful across many data types. For specific operations, you may need to reach to modules specific to the data types. For example, if you want to insert an element at a given position in a list, you should use the `List.insert_at/3` function from [the `List` module](/docs/stable/elixir/List.html), as it would make little sense to insert a value into, for example, a range.

We say the functions in the `Enum` module are polymorphic because they can work with diverse data types. In particular, the functions in the `Enum` module can work with any data type that implements [the `Enumerable` protocol](/docs/stable/elixir/Enumerable.html). We are going to discuss Protocols in a later chapter, for now we are going to move on to a specific kind of enumerable called streams.

## 10.2 Eager vs Lazy

All the functions in the `Enum` module are eager. Many functions expect an enumerable and return a list back:

```iex
iex> odd? = &(rem(&1, 2) != 0)
#Function<6.80484245/1 in :erl_eval.expr/5>
iex> Enum.filter(1..3, odd?)
[1, 3]
```

This means that when performing multiple operations with `Enum`, each operation is going to generate an intermediate list until we reach the result:

```iex
iex> 1..100_000 |> Enum.map(&(&1 * 3)) |> Enum.filter(odd?) |> Enum.sum
7500000000
```

The example above has a pipeline of operations. We start with a range and then multiply each element in the range by 3. This first operation will now create and return a list with `100_000` items. Then we keep all odd elements from the list, generating a new list, now with `50_000` items, and then we sum all entries.

As an alternative, Elixir provides [the `Stream` module](/docs/stable/elixir/Stream.html) which supports lazy operations:

```iex
iex> 1..100_000 |> Stream.map(&(&1 * 3)) |> Stream.filter(odd?) |> Enum.sum
7500000000
```

Instead of generating intermediate lists, streams create a series of computations that are invoked only when we pass it to the `Enum` module. Streams are useful when working with large, *possibly infinite*, collections.

## 10.3 Streams

Streams are lazy, composable enumerables.

They are lazy because, as shown in the example above, `1..100_000 |> Stream.map(&(&1 * 3))` returns a data type, an actual stream, that represents the `map` computation over the range `1..100_000`:

```iex
iex> 1..100_000 |> Stream.map(&(&1 * 3))
#Stream<[enum: 1..100000, funs: [#Function<34.16982430/1 in Stream.map/2>]]>
```

Furthermore, they are composable because we can pipe many stream operations:

```iex
iex> 1..100_000 |> Stream.map(&(&1 * 3)) |> Stream.filter(odd?)
#Stream<[enum: 1..100000, funs: [...]]>
```

Many functions in the `Stream` module accept any enumerable as argument and return a stream as result. It also provides functions for creating streams, possibly infinite. For example, `Stream.cycle/1` can be used to create a stream that cycles a given enumerable infinitely. Be careful to not call a function like `Enum.map/2` on such streams, as they would cycle forever:

```iex
iex> stream = Stream.cycle([1, 2, 3])
#Function<15.16982430/2 in Stream.cycle/1>
iex> Enum.take(stream, 10)
[1, 2, 3, 1, 2, 3, 1, 2, 3, 1]
```

On the other hand, `Stream.unfold/2` can be used to generate values from a given initial value:

```iex
iex> stream = Stream.unfold("hełło", &String.next_codepoint/1)
#Function<39.75994740/2 in Stream.unfold/2>
iex> Enum.take(stream, 3)
["h", "e", "ł"]
```

Another interesting function is `Stream.resource/3` which can be used to wrap around resources, guaranteeing they are opened right before enumeration and closed afterwards, even in case of failures. For example, we can use it to stream a file:

```iex
iex> stream = File.stream!("path/to/file")
#Function<18.16982430/2 in Stream.resource/3>
iex> Enum.take(stream, 10)
```

The example above will fetch the first 10 lines of the file you have selected. This means streams can be very useful for handling large files or even slow resources like network resources.

The amount of functions and functionality in [`Enum`](/docs/stable/elixir/Enum.html) and [`Stream`](/docs/stable/elixir/Stream.html) modules can be daunting at first but you will get familiar with them case by case. In particular, focus on the `Enum` module first and only move to `Stream` for the particular scenarios where laziness is required to either deal with slow resources or large, possibly infinite, collections.

Next we'll look at a feature central to Elixir, Processes, which allows us to write concurrent, parallel and distributed programs in an easy and understandable way.
