---
layout: getting_started
title: 17 try, catch and rescue
guide: 17
---

# {{ page.title }}

  <div class="toc"></div>

Elixir has three error mechanisms: errors, throws and exits. In this chapter we will explore each of them and include remarks about when each should be used.

## 17.1 Errors

A sample error can be retrieved by trying to add a number into an atom:

```iex
iex> :foo + 1
** (ArithmeticError) bad argument in arithmetic expression
     :erlang.+(:foo, 1)
```

A runtime error can be raised any time by using the `raise/1` macro:

```iex
iex> raise "oops"
** (RuntimeError) oops
```

Other errors can be raised with `raise/2` passing the error name and a list of keyword arguments:

```iex
iex> raise ArgumentError, message: "invalid argument foo"
** (ArgumentError) invalid argument foo
```

You can also define your own errors using the `defexception/2` macro. The most common case is to define an exception with a message field:

```iex
iex> defexception MyError, message: "default message"
iex> raise MyError
** (MyError) default message
iex> raise MyError, message: "custom message"
** (MyError) custom message
```

Exceptions can be rescued by using the `try/rescue` construct:

```iex
iex> try do
...>   raise "oops"
...> rescue
...>   e in RuntimeError -> e
...> end
RuntimeError[message: "oops"]
```

The example above rescues the runtime error and returns the error itself which is then printed in the `iex` session. In practice Elixir developers rarely use the `try/rescue` construct though. For example, many languages would force you to rescue an error when a file cannot open successfully. Elixir instead provides a `File.read/1` function which returns a tuple containing information if the file was opened with success or not:

```iex
iex> File.read "hello"
{:error, :enoent}
iex> File.write "hello", "world"
:ok
iex> File.read "hello"
{:ok, "world"}
````

There is no `try/rescue` here. In case you want to handle multiple outcomes of opening a file, you can simply use pattern matching with `case`:

```iex
iex> case File.read "hello" do
...>   {:ok, body} -> IO.puts "got ok"
...>   {:error, body} -> IO.puts "got error"
...> end
```

At the end of the day, it is up to your application to decide if an error while opening a file is exceptional or not. That's why Elixir doesn't impose exceptions on `File.read/1` and many other functions. Instead we leave it up to the developer to choose the best way to proceed.

For the cases where you do expect a file to exist (and the lack of a file is truly an error) you can simply use `File.read!/1`:

```iex
iex> File.read! "unknown"
** (File.Error) could not read file unknown: no such file or directory
    (elixir) lib/file.ex:305: File.read!/1
```

In other words, we avoid using `try/rescue` because **we don't use errors for control flow**. In Elixir, we take errors literally: they are reserved to unexpected and/or exceptional situations. In case you actually need flow control constructs, throws must be used. That's what we are going to see next.

## 17.2 Throws

In Elixir, one can throw a value to be caught later. `throw` and `catch` are reserved for situations where it is not possible to retrieve a value unless by using `throw` and `catch`.

Those situations are quite uncommon in practice unless when interfacing with a library that does not provide the proper APIs. For example, let's imagine the `Enum` module did not provide any API for finding a value and we need to find the first number that is a multiple of 13:

```iex
iex> try do
...>   Enum.each -50..50, fn(x) ->
...>     if rem(x, 13) == 0, do: throw(x)
...>   end
...>   "Got nothing"
...> catch
...>   x -> "Got #{x}"
...> end
"Got -39"
```

However, in practice one can simply use `Enum.find/2`:

```iex
iex> Enum.find -50..50, &(rem(&1, 13) == 0)
-39
```

## 17.3 Exits

Every Elixir code runs inside processes that communicates with each other. When a process dies, it sends an `exit` signal. A process can also die by explicitly sending an exit signal:

```iex
iex> spawn_link fn -> exit(1) end
#PID<0.56.0>
** (EXIT from #PID<0.56.0>) 1
```

In the example above, the linked process died by sending an `exit` signal with value of 1. The Elixir shell automatically handles those messages and prints them to the terminal.

`exit` can also be "caught" using `try/catch`:

```iex
iex> try do
...>   exit "I am exiting"
...> catch
...>   :exit, _ -> "not really"
...> end
"not really"
```

Using `try/catch` is already uncommon and using it to catch exits is even more rare.

`exit` signals are an important part of the fault tolerant system provided by the Erlang VM. Processes usually run under supervision trees which are themselves processes that just wait for `exit` signals of the supervised processes. Once an exit signal is received, the supervision strategy kicks in and the supervised process is restarted.

It is exactly this supervision system that makes constructs like `try/catch` and `try/rescue` so uncommon in Elixir. Instead of rescuing a certain error, we'd rather "fail fast" since the supervision tree will guarantee our application will go back to a known initial state after the error.

## 17.4 After

Sometimes it is necessary to use `try/after` to guarantee a resource is cleaned up after some particular action. For example, we can open a file and guarantee it is closed with `try/after` block:

```iex
iex> {:ok, file} = File.open "sample", [:utf8, :write]
iex> try do
...>   IO.write file, "olá"
...>   raise "oops, something went wrong"
...> after
...>   File.close(file)
...> end
** (RuntimeError) oops, something went wrong
```

## 17.5 Variables scope

It is important to bear in mind that variables defined inside `try/catch/rescue/after` blocks do not leak to the outer context. This is because the `try` block may fail and as such the variables may never be bound in the first place. In other words, this code is invalid:

```iex
iex> try do
...>   from_try = true
...> after
...>   from_after = true
...> end
iex> from_try
** (RuntimeError) undefined function: from_try/0
iex> from_after
** (RuntimeError) undefined function: from_after/0
```

This finishes our introduction to `try`, `catch` and `rescue`. You will find they are used less frequently in Elixir than in other languages although they may be handy in some situations where a library or some particular code is not playing "by the rules".

It is time to talk about some Elixir constructs like comprehensions and sigils.
